# Choosing the right EMS/TENS device to use with openEMSstim

Like most amplifiers the openEMSstim control board looses some signal intensity. This means you need to feed it with a "strong enough" EMS signal to produce a visible contraction on the user's muscles (this naturally depends on the skin conductivity, electrode placement, size of muscle, etc). 

Please note that some TENS machines (specially the really small ones, often powered by button cells instead of 9v blocks) will not provide sufficient current (milliamps) for you to have a visible contraction of the muscle. If your plan is to generate muscle contractions with some force, e.g., for force-feedback applications such as <this one>, avoid those. Instead, search for a medically compliant (check regulation of your country) EMS or TENS machine, typically those powered by 9V and inspect the specifications before buying it. You are looking for a machine that has one or two channels (preferably two) and an output current of 70~100mA.  

I personally prefer analog machines to the digital ones. In either case, the pulse of your machine might look something like a square waveform (with an up pulse and a down pulse, that's important) or a  sharp sine that slowly decays later (a modulated square wave with a faster and higher attack). The typical TENS machines we tested so far range up to 70mA or 100mA. You won't need all that power to actuate a muscle though. 

Here's a list of machines we have tested with this system (if you have new ones please submit through GitHub's pull request):

| Machine       | Actuates ok?   | observations  	| Link | analog or digital? | no. of channels |  
| ------------- |:--------:| ---------:|------------:|------------:|------------:|
| Sanitas  		|yes 	|Powerful 	|http://www.sanitas-online.de/web/_dokumente/GAs/therapie/752.907-0212_SEM43.pdf| digital | 2 | 
| TNS SM1 (Serie C) 		|yes		|Will be enough for most arm muscles. Not powerful enough for very strong actuations or leg muscles. Reported max 70 mA 		| https://www.yumpu.com/de/document/view/2545660/tens-gerat-tns-sm-1-aks-reizstromgerat-schwa-medico | analog | 2 | 
| TNS SM2 		|yes		|similar as above			|https://www.yumpu.com/de/document/view/2534032/tens-gerat-tns-sm-2-mf-schwa-medico| analog | 2 | 

### License and Liability

Please refer to the liability waiver (in documentation/liability_waiver.md).

Please refer to the license (in /license.md)

