# Exploring EMS settings and parameters

Electrical Muscle Stimulation (EMS) establishes a circuit between your muscles (which might include muscle fibers and nerves), this means that electrical parameters (intensity) and signal parameters (frequency and pulse width) matter a lot. 

##0. Video tutorial on basics of EMS

Before diving into the secondary parameters such as pulse width and frequency, make sure you are familiar with the basics. Here's a <a href="http://research.levelup.webfactional.com/ems/#testingEMSmachine">video tutorial</a> on how to get started with a off the shelf TENS/EMS device. 

##1. How do EMS signals look like? 

EMS waveforms can different depending on which machine is generating these. The majority of machines use a biphasic pulse, which means it has a positive and negative side: 
Here's an example <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KMxIfj7zhlw&t=3m10s">video</a>. What you see there is the bracelet used in <a href="http://plopes.org/project/proprioceptive-interaction/">Proprioceptive Interaction</a> and there you are able to see clearly how the waveform looks like. Note that it has a faster and stronger rising pulse (positive side) and a slower negative decay that brings it all the way from negative to zero (negative side). Although this looks like a smooth pulse, different machines have different strategies so you might encounter waveforms that look more squared, etc. 

### A quick word about voltage vs current… 
EMS machines typically are current driven, this means when you are rotating the dial, the amplifiers inside will regulate the voltage to reach the current that you want to send to the muscles (remember the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm%27s_law">Ohm's Law relationship between Voltage and Current?</a>). So when you read in your oscilloscope something like 20V or 50V while using an EMS machine, remember that albeit this sounding like a "lot of volts" that is probably only "a little current", like 10mA or so which in fact might be less than you need to power an Arduino. For comparison a 9V block has 200mA of energy inside. 

##2. Intensity

Intensity tells you directly how strong the muscle contraction will be. This is typically measured in milliamps (mAmps). Most EMS machines will be current-capped at 70 or 100mA. 

Note that some machines have arbitrary scales (such as 1-10) or so and these do not map directly to mA. The sports medicine community has studied EMS for their applications, here'a s few words from them with regards to increasing the amplitude:

- Increase the depth of penetration, i.e., how deep you can reach, in fact muscles are layered on top of other muscles which means that you can reach deeper muscles this way.
- Increase the number of neurons depolarized
- Amplitude should be adjusted to produce a desired physiologic response
- Physiologic response is the key, do not focus on the number of milliamps.

With "Physiologic response" it is meant what this will cause in your body: 

1. When the current is very low: you won't feel anything. (sub-sensory phase)
2. When the current is just a little: you will feel "tingling" (sensory phase)
3. After this: you will actuate motor neurons (motor phase)
4. After too much current: you are inducing pain (noxious phase)

Lastly, keep in mind that this intensity value represents the amplitude of the pulse. However, because this is a square wave (goes on an off), the frequency and pulse width can also be used to increase the power of the signal, as we will see now.

##3. Pulse Width / Duty Cycle

The pulse width of a signal is how long is the pulse of a signal (here we are mostly dealing with rectangular ones or rectangular look-alike signals). This means, the longer the pulse duration (i.e, the longer the pulse width) the more energy is contained in your signal. For EMS signals the pulse width is measured in microseconds (the more microseconds the bigger the pulse width). 

Duty cycle is a similar concept but measured in percentage since it mostly applies to rectangular waves. The duty cycle states how much time your signal is ON or OFF. So a duty cycle of 50% means half on and half off (of a fixed frequency). Likewise a duty cycle of 75% means three quarters of the time ON and only one quarter OFF. 

##4. Frequency

The frequency of a signal is how many times you are repeating your signal's pattern per second (measured in Hz). Note that your muscles react to particular frequencies differently. According to sports medicine "a higher frequency is generally associated with higher force. (because of the way each subsequent twitch adds to the previous one)." Also it is stated that: "Different fiber types respond differently to different stimulation frequencies. Aparticular frequency will stimulate more fully fibers of a particular type." 


### License and Liability

Please refer to the liability waiver (in documentation/liability_waiver.md).

Please refer to the license (in /license.md)
